README.md, before:

# Fossa [![Build Status][status]](https://travis-ci.org/observing/fossa) [![NPM version][npmimgurl]](http://npmjs.org/package/fossa) [![Coverage Status][coverage]](http://coveralls.io/r/observing/fossa?branch=master)

[status]: https://travis-ci.org/observing/fossa.png?branch=master
[npmimgurl]: https://badge.fury.io/js/fossa.png
[coverage]: http://coveralls.io/repos/observing/fossa/badge.png?branch=master

Backbone powered model interface to MongoDB, thin wrapper around MongoDB. Fossa
uses the API provided by [Backbone][backbone] and proxies it methods to the
[native MongoDB driver][mongodb].

Fossa provides first class database and collection control. This great power
comes with responsibilities. The developer should manage database switches,
seperation of concerns and data integrity. In return Fossa will provide an easy
interface for interaction with the objects in MongoDB.

## Installation

```sh
npm install fossa --save
```

## Examples

**Will follow asap**

## Versioning

Fossa's version is synced to MongoDB releases (since 2.6.0). For instance, version
2.6.x will be compatible with MongDB 2.6 and patch releases.

## Documentation

The API of fossa is 1:1 compatible with backbone. For a good reference of available
methods see the [BackboneJS documentation][backbone].

### Table of Contents

**Collection or Model properties**
- [Object.readable](#objectreadable)
- [Object.writable](#objectwritable)
- [Object.fossa](#objectfossa)

**Collection or Model functions**
- [Object.use](#objectuse)
- [Object.client](#objectclient)
- [Object.define](#objectdefine)
- [Object.setup](#objectsetup)

**Instances**
- [Collection](#collection)
- [Model](#model)

### Instantiation

Create a new Fossa instance by calling the constructor. After construction Fossa
will expose a model and collection sprinkled with mongoDB proxy methods. The
connection will be prepared and exposed through `Fossa.mongoclient`. The native
C++ parser of MongoDB will be enabled by default.

```js
var fossa = new Fossa({
    host: '127.0.0.1' // defaults to localhost
  , port: '1337' // defaults to 27017
  , options: { native_parser: true } // optional options
});
```

#### Object.readable

Create a read-only property on the `Collection` or `Model`. This method is a
shorthand for `Object.defineProperty` and not enumerable or writable.

- **key**: _{String}_ required property key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value can be string, array, object or function

```js
var collection = new fossa.Collection;
collection.readable('url', 'http://not.changable.after');
```

#### Object.writable

Create a writable property on the `Collection` or `Model`. This method is a
shorthand for `Object.defineProperty` with writable and configurable properties.

- **key**: _{String}_ required property key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value can be string, array, object or function

```js
var model = new fossa.Model;
model.writable('url', 'http://is.changeable.after');
model.url = 'http://changed.url.com';
```

#### Object.fossa

Read-only reference to the `Fossa` instance. On construction of the `Collection`
or `Model` the instance is set. The instance is used to connect to the database.

```js
var model = new fossa.Model;
model.fossa.connect('mydatabase', 'mycollection', function done(err, client) {
  console.log('connected to mydatabase');
});
```

#### Object.use

Collections are the equivalent of a MongoDB database. However, the mapping to a
specific database is not forced or persisted automatically. Any collection can be
switched to another database name. Only data in memory will be saved to the database.

- **database**: _{String}_ required database name

```js
account.use('observer').save(...);
```

#### Object.client

Establishes a connection with MongoDB. The `Fossa` instance will make sure
connections are made from one pool. The completion callback receives two arguments.
An error (if any) argument and an object representating a connected client.

- **done**: _{Function}_ required completion callback

```js
account.client(function done(err, client) {
  console.log(client);
})
```

#### Object.define

Helper method to define a key:value on the `Collection` or a `Model`.

- **key**: _{String}_ required key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value

```js
account.define('username', 'idontwantanaccount');
```

#### Object.setup

Add before and after hooks for specific methods. The hooks need to be define on
the model as objects. Where the first part is a known synchronization method, per
example `create`. In the example below the method `username` will be called before
and after the the username property is stored/changed.

- **hooks**: _{Array}_ keys of hooks to use

```js
var Model = Base.extend({
      before: { 'create username': 'username' },
      after: { 'delete username': 'username' }
    })
  , model = new Model().setup(['before', 'after']);
```

### Collection

Fossa will expose a Backbone `Collection`, which can be extended upon to suit your
needs. This offers flexibility, however beware you don't overwrite our
proxied methods. Initialize the Collection before use.

```js
var Accounts = fossa.Collection.extend({
  database: 'observer'
});

//
// Initialize a new account.
//
var accounts = new Accounts;
```

**Fossa.Collection properties**
- [Collection.model](#collectionmodel)
- [Collection._database](#collection-database)

**Fossa.Collection instance**
- [Collection.id](#collectionid)
- [Collection.sync](#collectionsync)
- [Collection.clone](#collectionclone)

Fossa Collections have no required keys. However, before saving models a
database should always be provided.

#### Collection.model

The default model for a `Collection` is the `fossa.Model. Calling `Collection.add`
will create a new Model of that type on the Collection. If you like to define a
different default Model, extend the Collection.

```js
var Accounts = fossa.Collection.extend({
  model: fossa.Model.extend({
    idAttribute: 'ID'
  })
})
```

#### Collection._database

Used to store the current database name. All synchronization will be done against
the database set on this key. Can be set by prodiving `options.database = 'mydb` to
the constructor of the Collection.

#### Collection.id

Find a `Model` in the `Collection` by `ObjectId`. An `ObjectId` is a
[native property][objectid] stored on each MongoDB model. Only one model is
returned. The find is performed against the Models in Collection memory only.

- **key**: _{ObjectId}_ required 24 byte hex string, valid MongoDB ObjectId

```js
var user = account.id('4cdfb11e1f3c000000007822');
console.log(user);
```

#### Collection.sync

Synchronise the Models in Collection memory to MongoDB. Manually calling this
method is usally not required or advised. The global `Backbone.sync` is
overwritten and will proxy to this method. To mimic [Backbone.sync][backbonesync]
patterns a promise is returned.

If the method is `create` and the colletion contains any models that
are already stored, the method will be switched to update. Similarly if
there are [new models](#modelisnew) in the collection,  `options.upsert = true`
will be set.

- **method**: _{String}_ optional CREATE, READ, UPDATE or DELETE, defaults to create
- **collection**: _{Collection}_ optional collection object or this
- **options**: _{Object}_ optional options

```js
account.sync('create', account, {}).done(function done(err, result) {
  console.log(result);
});
```

#### Collection.clone

Duplicated behavior of the original `Collection.clone` method. With the exception
that options are provided to restore the `url` and `database` properties on the
object. This is done to ensure `sync` works with fresh objects and does not
affect the used models.

```js
var users = new fossa.Collection([{ firstname: 'Davy' }, { firstname: 'Jones' }])
  , otherGroup = users.clone();
```

### Model

Fossa will expose a Backbone `Model`, which can be extended with additional
properties and values.

```js
var User = fossa.Model.extend({
  firstname: 'Davy',
  lastname: 'Jones'
});
```

**Fossa.Model properties**
- [Model.idAttribute](#modelidAttribute)
- [Model._stored](#modelstored)

**Fossa.Model instance**
- [Model.sync](#modelsync)
- [Model.save](#modelsave)
- [Model.isNew](#modelisnew)
- [Model.clone](#modelclone)

#### Model.idAttribute

Sets the reference ID for all models to `_id`, which is the internal MongoDB ID.
This will ensure models can be correctly resolved when synchronized. This can be
changed to any user defined ID, however this is not advised. MongoDB will ensure
each model is suppied with a unique ID on `_id`.

```js
var User = fossa.Model.extend({
  idAttribute: 'cid'
});
```

#### Model._stored

Keep track of the current state of the Model. If the `_id` of the Model changes,
the `_stored` state will be updated. This property is set on construction and used
by [isNew](#modelisnew).

#### Model.sync

Synchronise the Model to MongoDB. Manually calling this method is usally not
required or advised. The global `Backbone.sync` is overwritten and will proxy to
this method. To mimic [Backbone.sync][backbonesync] patterns a promise is returned.

Like with `Collection.sync` the method will be changed to update if the Model has
a `_stored` property.

- **method**: _{String}_ optional CREATE, READ, UPDATE or DELETE, defaults to create
- **model**: _{Model}_ optional model object or this
- **options**: _{Object}_ optional options

```js
user.sync('create', user, {}).done(function done(err, result) {
  console.log(result);
});
```

#### Model.save

The default model.save is overwritten. This is done to ensure an XHR object is
returned from the method. otherwise if validation fails, `false` would be
returned. Other than that the `save` method proxies to the default method. In
other words you can now do the following without worrying about the return value.

If the validation fails, an error is returned.

```
user.save().done(function done(error, result) {
  console.log(error);
})
```

#### Model.isNew

Helper function to check if the current Model is [stored](#modelstored) in the
database yet. The method will return a boolean, if false the Model has been
stored in the database.

```js
var stored = user.isNew();
```

#### Model.clone

Duplicated behavior of the original `Model.clone` method. With the exception
that options are provided to restore the `urlRoot` and `database` properties on
the object. This is done to ensure `sync` works with fresh objects and does not
affect the model.

```js
var user = new fossa.Model({ firstname: 'Davy', lastname: 'Jones' })
  , otherUser = user.clone();
```


## Tests

Test can be run as follows, make sure all devDependencies have been installed.

```sh
npm test
```

[backbone]: http://backbonejs.org/
[mongodb]: https://github.com/christkv/node-mongodb-native/
[objectid]: http://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/api-bson-generated/objectid.html
[backbonesync]: http://backbonejs.org/#Sync

Commit message:

[minor] set _stored property of each model on sync

README.md, after:

# Fossa [![Build Status][status]](https://travis-ci.org/observing/fossa) [![NPM version][npmimgurl]](http://npmjs.org/package/fossa) [![Coverage Status][coverage]](http://coveralls.io/r/observing/fossa?branch=master)

[status]: https://travis-ci.org/observing/fossa.png?branch=master
[npmimgurl]: https://badge.fury.io/js/fossa.png
[coverage]: http://coveralls.io/repos/observing/fossa/badge.png?branch=master

Backbone powered model interface to MongoDB, thin wrapper around MongoDB. Fossa
uses the API provided by [Backbone][backbone] and proxies it methods to the
[native MongoDB driver][mongodb].

Fossa provides first class database and collection control. This great power
comes with responsibilities. The developer should manage database switches,
seperation of concerns and data integrity. In return Fossa will provide an easy
interface for interaction with the objects in MongoDB.

## Installation

```sh
npm install fossa --save
```

## Examples

**Will follow asap**

## Versioning

Fossa's version is synced to MongoDB releases (since 2.6.0). For instance, version
2.6.x will be compatible with MongDB 2.6 and patch releases.

## Documentation

The API of fossa is 1:1 compatible with backbone. For a good reference of available
methods see the [BackboneJS documentation][backbone].

### Table of Contents

**Collection or Model properties**
- [Object.readable](#objectreadable)
- [Object.writable](#objectwritable)
- [Object.fossa](#objectfossa)

**Collection or Model functions**
- [Object.use](#objectuse)
- [Object.client](#objectclient)
- [Object.define](#objectdefine)
- [Object.setup](#objectsetup)

**Instances**
- [Collection](#collection)
- [Model](#model)

### Instantiation

Create a new Fossa instance by calling the constructor. After construction Fossa
will expose a model and collection sprinkled with mongoDB proxy methods. The
connection will be prepared and exposed through `Fossa.mongoclient`. The native
C++ parser of MongoDB will be enabled by default.

```js
var fossa = new Fossa({
    host: '127.0.0.1' // defaults to localhost
  , port: '1337' // defaults to 27017
  , options: { native_parser: true } // optional options
});
```

#### Object.readable

Create a read-only property on the `Collection` or `Model`. This method is a
shorthand for `Object.defineProperty` and not enumerable or writable.

- **key**: _{String}_ required property key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value can be string, array, object or function

```js
var collection = new fossa.Collection;
collection.readable('url', 'http://not.changable.after');
```

#### Object.writable

Create a writable property on the `Collection` or `Model`. This method is a
shorthand for `Object.defineProperty` with writable and configurable properties.

- **key**: _{String}_ required property key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value can be string, array, object or function

```js
var model = new fossa.Model;
model.writable('url', 'http://is.changeable.after');
model.url = 'http://changed.url.com';
```

#### Object.fossa

Read-only reference to the `Fossa` instance. On construction of the `Collection`
or `Model` the instance is set. The instance is used to connect to the database.

```js
var model = new fossa.Model;
model.fossa.connect('mydatabase', 'mycollection', function done(err, client) {
  console.log('connected to mydatabase');
});
```

#### Object.use

Collections are the equivalent of a MongoDB database. However, the mapping to a
specific database is not forced or persisted automatically. Any collection can be
switched to another database name. Only data in memory will be saved to the database.

- **database**: _{String}_ required database name

```js
account.use('observer').save(...);
```

#### Object.client

Establishes a connection with MongoDB. The `Fossa` instance will make sure
connections are made from one pool. The completion callback receives two arguments.
An error (if any) argument and an object representating a connected client.

- **done**: _{Function}_ required completion callback

```js
account.client(function done(err, client) {
  console.log(client);
})
```

#### Object.define

Helper method to define a key:value on the `Collection` or a `Model`.

- **key**: _{String}_ required key
- **value**: _{Mixed}_ required value

```js
account.define('username', 'idontwantanaccount');
```

#### Object.setup

Add before and after hooks for specific methods. The hooks need to be define on
the model as objects. Where the first part is a known synchronization method, per
example `create`. In the example below the method `username` will be called before
and after the the username property is stored/changed.

- **hooks**: _{Array}_ keys of hooks to use

```js
var Model = Base.extend({
      before: { 'create username': 'username' },
      after: { 'delete username': 'username' }
    })
  , model = new Model().setup(['before', 'after']);
```

### Collection

Fossa will expose a Backbone `Collection`, which can be extended upon to suit your
needs. This offers flexibility, however beware you don't overwrite our
proxied methods. Initialize the Collection before use.

```js
var Accounts = fossa.Collection.extend({
  database: 'observer'
});

//
// Initialize a new account.
//
var accounts = new Accounts;
```

**Fossa.Collection properties**
- [Collection.model](#collectionmodel)
- [Collection._database](#collection-database)

**Fossa.Collection instance**
- [Collection.id](#collectionid)
- [Collection.sync](#collectionsync)
- [Collection.clone](#collectionclone)

Fossa Collections have no required keys. However, before saving models a
database should always be provided.

#### Collection.model

The default model for a `Collection` is the `fossa.Model. Calling `Collection.add`
will create a new Model of that type on the Collection. If you like to define a
different default Model, extend the Collection.

```js
var Accounts = fossa.Collection.extend({
  model: fossa.Model.extend({
    idAttribute: 'ID'
  })
})
```

#### Collection._database

Used to store the current database name. All synchronization will be done against
the database set on this key. Can be set by prodiving `options.database = 'mydb` to
the constructor of the Collection.

#### Collection.id

Find a `Model` in the `Collection` by `ObjectId`. An `ObjectId` is a
[native property][objectid] stored on each MongoDB model. Only one model is
returned. The find is performed against the Models in Collection memory only.

- **key**: _{ObjectId}_ required 24 byte hex string, valid MongoDB ObjectId

```js
var user = account.id('4cdfb11e1f3c000000007822');
console.log(user);
```

#### Collection.sync

Synchronise the Models in Collection memory to MongoDB. Manually calling this
method is usally not required or advised. The global `Backbone.sync` is
overwritten and will proxy to this method. To mimic [Backbone.sync][backbonesync]
patterns a promise is returned.

If the method is `create` and the colletion contains any models that
are already stored, the method will be switched to update. Similarly if
there are [new models](#modelisnew) in the collection,  `options.upsert = true`
will be set.

- **method**: _{String}_ optional CREATE, READ, UPDATE or DELETE, defaults to create
- **collection**: _{Collection}_ optional collection object or this
- **options**: _{Object}_ optional options

```js
account.sync('create', account, {}).done(function done(err, result) {
  console.log(result);
});
```

#### Collection.clone

Duplicated behavior of the original `Collection.clone` method. With the exception
that options are provided to restore the `url` and `database` properties on the
object. This is done to ensure `sync` works with fresh objects and does not
affect the used models.

```js
var users = new fossa.Collection([{ firstname: 'Davy' }, { firstname: 'Jones' }])
  , otherGroup = users.clone();
```

### Model

Fossa will expose a Backbone `Model`, which can be extended with additional
properties and values.

```js
var User = fossa.Model.extend({
  firstname: 'Davy',
  lastname: 'Jones'
});
```

**Fossa.Model properties**
- [Model.idAttribute](#modelidAttribute)
- [Model._stored](#modelstored)

**Fossa.Model instance**
- [Model.sync](#modelsync)
- [Model.save](#modelsave)
- [Model.isNew](#modelisnew)
- [Model.clone](#modelclone)
- [Model.stored](#modelstored)

#### Model.idAttribute

Sets the reference ID for all models to `_id`, which is the internal MongoDB ID.
This will ensure models can be correctly resolved when synchronized. This can be
changed to any user defined ID, however this is not advised. MongoDB will ensure
each model is suppied with a unique ID on `_id`.

```js
var User = fossa.Model.extend({
  idAttribute: 'cid'
});
```

#### Model._stored

Keep track of the current state of the Model. If the `_id` of the Model changes,
the `_stored` state will be updated. This property is set on construction and used
by [isNew](#modelisnew).

#### Model.sync

Synchronise the Model to MongoDB. Manually calling this method is usally not
required or advised. The global `Backbone.sync` is overwritten and will proxy to
this method. To mimic [Backbone.sync][backbonesync] patterns a promise is returned.

Like with `Collection.sync` the method will be changed to update if the Model has
a `_stored` property.

- **method**: _{String}_ optional CREATE, READ, UPDATE or DELETE, defaults to create
- **model**: _{Model}_ optional model object or this
- **options**: _{Object}_ optional options

```js
user.sync('create', user, {}).done(function done(err, result) {
  console.log(result);
});
```

#### Model.save

The default model.save is overwritten. This is done to ensure an XHR object is
returned from the method. otherwise if validation fails, `false` would be
returned. Other than that the `save` method proxies to the default method. In
other words you can now do the following without worrying about the return value.

If the validation fails, an error is returned.

```
user.save().done(function done(error, result) {
  console.log(error);
})
```

#### Model.isNew

Helper function to check if the current Model is [stored](#modelstored) in the
database yet. The method will return a boolean, if false the Model has been
stored in the database.

```js
var stored = user.isNew();
```

#### Model.clone

Duplicated behavior of the original `Model.clone` method. With the exception
that options are provided to restore the `urlRoot` and `database` properties on
the object. This is done to ensure `sync` works with fresh objects and does not
affect the model.

```js
var user = new fossa.Model({ firstname: 'Davy', lastname: 'Jones' })
  , otherUser = user.clone();
```

#### Model.stored

Simple helper to update the `_stored` property of the model. If no argument is
passed the model will be tagged as stored. Pass `false` to set the stored state
to `false`. Under normal circumstances this method should not be called. `sync`
will handle updates to the `_stored` property.

- **state**: _{Boolean}_ optional pass explicit false to set stored to false

```js
user.stored();          // Model will be tagged as stored.
user.stored(false);     // Model will be tagged as not stored.
```

## Tests

Test can be run as follows, make sure all devDependencies have been installed.

```sh
npm test
```

[backbone]: http://backbonejs.org/
[mongodb]: https://github.com/christkv/node-mongodb-native/
[objectid]: http://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/api-bson-generated/objectid.html
[backbonesync]: http://backbonejs.org/#Sync
